# phyloflow
This GitHub repository will take you through some phylogenetic and gene flow analyses I performed on a small, and arguably good looking, [1][anole] from the Greater Antilles and the Bahamas.
## Background
Figuring out how living organisms adapt to the environment and diversity is one of the central objectives in evolutionary biology. Understanding the processes of adaptation and [2][speciation] and more broadly of evolution is an exciting endeavour that, in my opinion, on itself merits research. That said, what I find to be particularly cool is that humans can also rip the benefits from studies on evolution of animals distantly related to humans. The reason? All living organisms share a [3][genetic toolbox], that is increadibly conserved. The result is that by studying a small Caribbean anole we may identify candidate genes responsible for the adaptation of living organisms in wet versus dry environments.

If we are interested in studying how organisms adapt and how new species are formed the next question then is: What to study? Life is everywhere, doing all sorts of amazing things. Living organisms pull off [4][MacGyver]-esque feats to live in what would be for us unconceivable circumstances. My choice: I focus on using coloration to study evolution. Color is a jack of all trades trait. Animals are particularly crafty with their colors. Animals use colors, and color patterning, to communicate with potential partners or to not communicate at all with predators (i.e. [5][camouflage]); to signal quality to partners and competitors or to signal toxicity to predators (or at least lead predators to think so; i.e. [6][aposematism] and [7][mimicry]). Color can also be under strong selection by abiotic environmental factors, as the deposition of melanin is thought to block UV, and as differences in skin pigmentation are though to play a role in thermal regulation. As a bonus, all of these traits I have listed are external traits for which humans have developped great tools to measure (e.g. spectrometer); plus, with the advent of next generation sequencing ([8][NGS]) we are now able to look for links between these traits we are interested in and candidate genes that may be responsible for them in non-model organisms, a feat that allows us to use the diversity of colors that surrounds us in the natural world.

I focus my study on the small Caribbean anole *Anolis distichus*. Anoles are dope. That's just a fact. These are small to large lizards that: 1. Have colorful extensible throatfan, the dewlap, they use for communcation; 2. Have toepads, like geckos, which allow them to hang on to glass surfaces by a single digit; 3. Vary widely in shape and size and occupy the most varied niches across the Americas; 4. Are incredbily diverse, inhabitting environments that range from Tropical Rain forests to arid-regions in the shadow of mountains in the Caribbean. In particular, *Anolis distichus* appear to have pairs of populations showing different levels of reproductive isolation. Some of these pairs differ in dewlap color, others do not. This combination of dewlap color + reproductive isolation variation makes this system ideal to study the genetic basis of not only color, but also of speciation.

## Aims
My main aims with this project were to:
1. Obtain a well supported phylogenetic hypothesis for *Anolis distichus* by using genome-wide genetic markers;
2. Test if gene flow occurs between populations with different dewlap colors across hybrid zones located in environmental gradients;
3. Test if different pairs of populations show different levels of introgression across hybrid zones;
4. Test if regions of the genome with lower recombination rates, in particular sex-linked regions and inversions, show higher levels of differentiation and lower levels of introgression than the average genome-wide estimates;
5. Test if the same regions of the genome are introgressiokn across different hybrid zones;
6. Test if genes linked to color and color pattern are located in regions with lower introgression and higher differentiation levels.
